and now please welcome Tammy
[Applause]
[Music]
Peterson hello
Dublin my grandfather was from Belfast
so when I come here I kind
of yeah right on so Dr Peterson's going
to come out here tonight um I'm sure
you're very much looking forward to it
I'm looking forward to it and with that
I won't wa let you wait any longer I'll
invite Dr Jordan B Peterson out on stage
[Applause]
[Music]
you Irishmen are such an excitable
Bunch it's always fun to come to
Dublin I think it's probably too much
fun to come to Dublin actually yeah so
uh it's it's really remarkable to see
you all here and uh appreciate as I
always do appreciate the fact that
you've all taken the time and expended
the effort to to come and see this uh I
thought I would wander through the 24
rules and I don't know how many I'll
address but we'll see how it goes so
maybe we'll start with a rule from the
first book 12 rules treat yourself this
is rule number two treat yourself like
you are someone you were responsible for
helping that's a hard
one know there's an injunction a moral
injunction that you should treat other
people like you would like to be treated
yourself the Golden Rule let's say and
uh rather than he who has the gold makes
the rules right um that's that's not an
injunction to sacrifice yourself in some
unending way for the benefit of other
people which is often how it's
interpreted and it's not that it's uh
it's advice in relationship to
reciprocity and this is something really
worth knowing I've been thinking about
this for a long time you know because I
got interested in the nature of
malevolence and motivation for atrocity
I got interested in the in the nature of
evil and certainly as a consequence of
studying atrocious Behavior at the
clinical level and then also at the
political and economic and sociological
level I definitely became convinced that
it's a very naive person indeed who
doubts the existence of evil I think
it's easier to become convinced of the
reality of evil than it is to become
convinced of the reality of good it's
easier to Define evil than it is to
Define good but if you can specify the
nature of evil you help yourself infer
the existence of good because you can
say to yourself You can conclude that
whatever good is difficult though it may
be to put your finger on it it's the
opposite of
evil I did have this inkling you know
way years ago when I when I taught at
Harvard I was teaching about very dark
things uh about individual motivation
for the sort of Acts that characterized
say the worst atrocities of the
Holocaust and the and the catastrophic
situation with regards to stalinist
Russia those were the two places I
focused on the most and I had this voice
in the back of my head always when I was
lecturing very serious lectures that if
I could really manage those lectures
properly I would do it with a sense of
humor and I thought that just cannot be
right how in the world can you deal with
a topic that dark in a manner that
it's
playful I thought that's but the voice
wouldn't go away and I knew there was
something to it I knew there was
something to it and
so I've been trying to think about how
do you
concisely conceptualize the opposite of
evil how can you tell when things are
going in the opposite direction what if
there's a malevolent spirit that might
inhabit you if you walk down the darkest
possible road what would be the opposite
of that Spirit if it is inhabiting you
so to speak if you were walking down the
most positive of roads and I would say I
I do believe this to be the case that
that's
play so you know children play and it
says that there's a gospel statement
that unless you become as little
children you'll never enter the Kingdom
of Heaven it's a very complicated
statement it it means in part to regain
the pristine perception of wonder that
you you had as a gift in some sense when
you were a child if you have children
young children you you get to partake in
that if your eyes are at the least bit
open because one of the things that's
absolutely wonderful about young
children and having them around and the
way in some sense they pay you for the
painstaking care that you need to
exercise when you're when you're caring
for them is that they enable you to see
the world through fresh eyes and to see
things in their in their untrammeled by
cynicism glory and it's hard to open
yourself up to that you know especially
if you're an adult who's built layers of
shells around yourself for any number of
reasons but children offer you that
opportunity and so one of the reasons
that you should become as a little child
is so that you can see Miracles when
they unfold in front of you instead of
being blinded by your own defense of
cynicism and children can definitely
help with that but also
children play and you know we sort of
stop playing as we grow older and we
think we mature out of it but that's not
right what happens is that we can no
longer do it and a lot of that I think
is associated with the shock of puberty
you know because you have to integrate
sexuality into play and that's really
hard it's really challenging for people
partly because you're more likely to be
rejected on the sexual front for example
and that's very hard on people and then
also it's a more Danger game that's for
sure and so it's a big Challenge and a
lot of people stop playing when when
they're when they're
teenagers one of the reasons I think
that we've had somewhat of an explosion
of unhappiness and mental
illness um particularly among women by
the way over the last 30 years is
because a lot of what we've done
inadvertently has interfered with
children's ability to play and so for
example it's very hard for boys to play
in school because almost everything
they're required to do is antithetical
to the Rough and Tumble ethos of
masculine play that's really hard on
young boys and with young girls oh I was
talking I believe it was to Jonathan
height recently a famous psychologist in
the United States and he said that girls
have almost stopped doing patty cake and
skipping and that sort of thing you know
and these are deeply embodied forms of
play that might be something like the
female equivalent of rough and tumble
play among males and that rough and
tumbled play is a form of embodied dance
you know because if you're wrestling and
and fathers really like to do this with
their kids and kids really like it and
they really need it it teaches you the
extent of your body you know it teaches
you how to twist your body and to push
it to its limits and to expose yourself
to fear you know maybe your father
throws you up in the air and catches you
CU imagine doing someone doing that to
you as an adult 12T High person just
tosses you in the air and catches you
it's no wonder children sort of scream
with Terror and Delight but but they do
and they really you just can't believe
how much they need that to engage in
that play because they also learn what
hurts them and what doesn't cuz the most
fun direct physical play with kids
pushes them right to the Ragged edge of
disaster right it's like it's right
where it almost hurts that it's most
exciting and partly what you're doing
when you're playing is calibrating it to
make sure that it's as exciting exting
as possible but not too exciting and the
Rough and Tumble play is deeply embodied
it's not just abstract right it it
involves pain and anxiety and excitement
and frustration and turn taking and
detention it's very sophisticated and
that's just on the Rough and Tumble
front and then later you know as kids
develop they uh they start to engage in
pretend play and there's no difference
between pretend play and thinking they
are the same thing
you know and children Envision who they
might be they construct a fictional
character uh a father mother Playing
House let's say that's very common form
of pretend play and then they act it out
and in doing so they inhabit the roles
that they're going to take on as their
adults and if they don't do that they
don't know how to do it you know one of
the things I was worried about to some
degree when when my son was little uh he
had an older his older sister about a
year and a half older he was often
surrounded by her friends and they to
dress him up like as a princess or a
fairy and I was always looking kind of
at scance at that so I didn't want it to
go too far you know whatever that meant
but then I realized when I when I was
watching he was having fun and so were
they and I was watching it very
carefully to see what was going on and I
thought oh oh I should I got to leave
this completely alone because what he's
doing is acting out what it's like to be
a girl and how in the world are you
going to understand that if you can't
act it out and then if you forbid bid it
say you can't do that well what's the
message it's like you can't understand
females well of course you can't but you
shouldn't stop
[Applause]
your you should you shouldn't stop your
son from trying that's for sure and so
and that should be done in a spirit of
play and you know if you're if you have
a good marriage good partnership with
any one I don't care who it is but let's
say a marriage the more that you can
Elevate what you're doing to play the
better off you are in every possible way
you know there are preconditions for
play among children one precondition is
the person that you would like to play
with has to want to play with you right
it has to 100% be voluntary it it cannot
emerge even we know this even
psychobiologic there's a fair bit known
now about the say the underlying
neurological circuitry that's involved
in play because there's a specialized
neurological apparatus in mammals for
play and it's not merely a decoration on
top of something more fundamental it's
this is a very very deep and fundamental
uh part of the human psyche it any and
the psyche of any animal that has to
engage in reciprocal repeated social
interaction cu you might ask yourself
you know how do you know if you're
interacting with another person properly
well you might ask well what is properly
mean well it might mean they want to
interact with you it might mean they
want to interact with you in a way that
could repeat many many times and maybe
improve as it's repeating know you you
want to get along with people and you
want it to work now but you want it to
work now in a way that gets better
across time and then you might think if
that's the right way to act whatever
that means and it's a stable right way
to act because it emerges out of
iterated social interactions that you
might have an instinct to Mark when
that's happening and that's what happens
when you play and people find that
absolutely delightful if you're sitting
around with your friends in a bar
generally you're joking around and you
know that can get kind of rough but it
doesn't have to but it could Edge
towards rough cuz that's kind of fun and
it's a bit proddy you know to see where
you can find the edge and that can be
riotously entertaining and um and that's
all done in the spirit of play and so
you could say that a proper friendship
is actually predicated has its basis in
the spirit of play and then with regards
to the atrocity and evil that I was
discussing earlier say well if it's
power and compulsion and pride let's say
self-centeredness a kind of narrow
self-centeredness and a narcissism
hatred a bitterness all of that mangled
together
resentment vengefulness that all
constitutes the central spirit that
inhabits you if you're acting in a
malevolent manner what might be the
opposite of that and I do think it's the
spirit of voluntary play you know I had
a vision of Heaven at one point um
heaven was a place where people were
eternally
playing and it was a place where
everything was good but everyone was
playing to make it better yet so it was
a combination of what was really good
but that wasn't the end of it and maybe
that's because being itself is not good
enough you want becoming as well right
you don't want things to be static and
perfect you want them to be as good as
they can be but Dynamic so there's still
something to do and so you could play at
making things better and better and
that's that would be lovely if that was
true right if you could have what you
wanted if you really think it through
you might think well it would be lovely
if everyone could play a volunteer game
that everyone wanted to play that was
aimed at making things good but even
when they're good the aim was to make
them even better and then it would even
be better if when you were doing that it
was marked by a sense of what would you
say a profound sense of positive
engagement and the cessation of negative
emotion and one of the other things we
do know about play is that it's quite
disruptable by other motivational States
so it's not that easy for children to
play if they're hungry or tired or
anxious or upset or hurt if your
children are playing spontaneously it's
actually a Mark that what you've created
around them is a Walled Garden right the
walls protect them so there's not too
much chaos and uncertainty and the
garden is this place where things can
flourish a playground is a wall Garden
in in any you know in any real sense
wall Garden Paradise paradesa means wall
Garden by the way it's a balance between
culture and nature or between structure
and possibility you could also think
about a wall Garden as a game because a
game isn't you can do anything you want
a game is here's some principles rules
you might say here's some principles by
which you can govern your behavior
within that set of principles here's
some play right some freedom to maneuver
not so much that you drown and no one
knows what they're doing just exactly
the right amount so that it's playful
that's how it looks and so back to treat
yourself like you are someone you're
responsible for helping well you want to
approach other people in the spirit of
play but I would
say even though you probably shouldn't
teach people to play with themselves so
to speak um it's the right attitude to
bring to bear on yourself too and that's
a hard thing to do you know like we tend
to think that most people if we're
cynical we think well people are rather
selfish they're self-centered they only
want what's good for themselves it's
like first of all that's actually not
true there are some people who will
routinely take advantage of other people
to get what they want in the moment but
that's pretty rare in its extreme forms
which would be psychopathy let's say in
its extreme forms it's never more than
about 3% of people and then around the
Psychopaths there might be another kind
of cloud of narcissists who are
inclining in the same direction but
haven't got quite so far and maybe you
could add
another 5% on that you know depending on
the severity but that's it's just not
the case for most people most people
have the reverse problem they treat
themselves worse than they treat other
people and why well why would you do
that
well you know maybe you treat other
people not so well because you think
they deserve it and why would you think
that well cuz you know things about them
aren't as good as they could be uh and
you know that they've made mistakes
they've they've walked off the pathway
they've done things they shouldn't have
done and so you don't treat them as well
as you might otherwise but then you know
that about yourself more than you know
that about anyone else right you have
privileged access if you want it and
even if you don't you sort of have
privileged access to the entire panoply
of sins that you're responsible for and
that's a lot you know and most people
bear a pretty damn heavy burden of
existential guilt and some of that isn't
warranted you know lots of times you see
people in the Freudian sense who have a
super ego that's yelling at them too
vociferously you know one of the things
you do in therapy for people who are
hyper conscientious to the point where
their own internal voice is a tyrant is
you try to moderate
that and so people can call themselves
out on their misbehavior too much but
even if you don't do that generally you
have quite a lot of misbehavior and as a
consequence of that you're ashamed and
uncertain about your own value and so
then you don't think you really need
deserve to be treated very well and so
then you don't and one of the things you
do as a psychotherapist is well what a
lot of what I did for example people
sometimes would fall into a situ
sitation where they were being terribly
accused of some misbehavior by maybe in
a divorce case or maybe at work and I
would help them mount a defense for
themselves it's like you know we have
the presumption of innocence right which
is a complete bloody miracle that
presumption it's it's such a miracle
that that our legal system actually
starts from that perspective because be
so much easier just to say you're
accused of something hell there's 20
million people in the vicinity we don't
need you
maybe you're guilty off with your head
that's way simpler than despite the fact
that 40 people are coming after you with
accusations we have to assume you're
innocent God and it's very hard to do
that for yourself you know to mount a
defense and one of the things I used to
have my clients do if if they're in such
a situation is write out a defense it's
like treat yourself like you're innocent
just for the sake of argument we can
also do the same thing on the guilt
front you know maybe you should make a
case when you're in trouble about why
you're guilty as well as why you're
innocent to lay out the whole territory
but at least you should defend yourself
and then we might say also if you think
other people are worth taking care of if
you think
that if you think that other people have
value well they're individuals like you
and it doesn't seem all that plausible
that they could have value and that you
don't unless you're the worst person
around and you're probably not I mean
you're bad enough but on average you're
no worse than everybody else maybe in
your worst moments you know you manage
to climb to a new Pinnacle but generally
speaking you know other people are
carrying a fair weight of guilt around
on their shoulders too and so if anyone
has
value then you do so what would happen
if you treated yourself that way and
this is a dead serious question and it
isn't a matter of
thought can your savings weather another
economic storm think about what you've
put away for the future inflation can
render cash worthless and even real
estate can crash as it did in 2008
during times of economic uncertainty or
Market volatility investors tend to
flock to gold as a safe haven asset its
value tends to increase during turbulent
times providing a buffer against Market
downturns this is why people are
flocking to gold now and why Birch gold
is busier than ever Birch gold
understands that navigating financial
decisions can be daunting that's why
their dedicated in-house Ira department
is there to guide you every step of the
way Birch gold is committed to
addressing your questions and concerns
promptly their team is always ready to
provide answers and Clarity whether it's
about fees taxes on rollovers or the
timing of the process they are here to
ensure you feel valued and well informed
text Jordan to 98 9898 to talk to one of
birch Gold's experts and claim your free
info kit on gold you'll learn how to
convert an existing Ira or 401K into a
tax sheltered Ira in Gold the best part
is it doesn't cost you a penny out of
pocket just text Jordan to 9898 98
that's Jordan to 9898 98
today you know there's a gospel
statement which is very mysterious uh
knock and the door will
open ask and you will receive seek and
you'll find and that on the face of it
seems utterly preposterous cuz could the
world possibly be laid out in that
manner that seems too good to be true
and and you've asked plenty and haven't
received it's like
yeah maybe not you know because you got
to ask yourself what ask would mean that
might mean something like well first of
all you got your have your head screwed
on straight about who you are it's like
are you willing to act in your own best
interest and that doesn't mean are you
willing to give bra to your impulsive
Hedonism you know the problem with
impulsive Hedonism and that's sort of at
the core of what we tend to describe as
selfishness because a selfish person is
an impulsive hedonist who will sacrifice
other people to that impulsive Hedonism
and the reason I say impulsive Hedonism
is
because it's impulsive because you want
what you want right
now and you want it regardless of its
future costs and that might be future
cost even for you you know you know when
you act impulsively you go out and you
party too much let's say you have too
much fun and you know you're burning
tomorrow and the next couple of days to
exaggerate the intensity of what you
have right now and you know that
everyone knows or you learn soon that
that's just not sustainable you know you
have to treat yourself in the moment in
a way that doesn't interfere with how
you're going to function tomorrow and
next week and a month from now and next
year and 5 years down the road you can't
sacrifice the future for the present if
you're an impulsive henst you're not
exactly selfish you're selfish and
immature and you're selfish because it's
about you but you're stupidly selfish
because it's about you now and that's
just unwise in every sense of the word
you know the younger you are and I mean
chronologically the more impulsive and
hedonic hedonically oriented in some
deep sense you are 2-year-olds are very
impul Ive and that's why we don't let
them set up colonies and live
independently you know they they can't
govern their behavior with regards to
Future consequences they're not mature
and wise enough to have that breadth of
of view and hopefully as you mature you
become capable of regulating your
behavior in the present so that your own
path goes at least stays steady but
hopefully even goes uphill and so that's
back to this rule is uh treat yourself
like you are someone you are responsible
for helping is that I think in some real
sense you want to enter into the kind of
relationship with yourself that's also
marked in its highest manner by the
spirit of play and we know this too you
if you we look for experiences like this
all the time to put us in that place
although we don't necessarily notice
that that that that's what we're doing
when you go to to a concert you go to
hear
musicians play and when you go to a a a
dramatic production a movie you see
people playing a part and the playing
part of that isn't trivial and you go
there to participate in the play and you
do the same thing when you go to a
sports event you know and and you and
you do it in an embodied way and it's so
interesting to watch you know if you're
if you're watching a football game and
some remarkable player makes a
remarkable shot you'll jump up to your
feet and throw your arms in the air
before you even notice right it's
completely spontaneous it's completely
bottom up it's not that much different
than what you do when you you're at a
comedy show and you spontaneously laugh
right you don't hear think that's a
funny joke I should laugh there's no
thought between the joke and the
catching of the punchline and the
spontaneous reaction and you do that
because you want to experience that
sense of play and we'll pay for the
privilege of of being in a place that's
setting that up is facilitating it and
we all regard that especially when it's
going well you know and you maybe you're
going to listen to a great band it's a
genre that really speaks to you and the
band just gets cooking you know and
everyone knows what that means and means
they're playing off each other that
often happens when they're good at
improvising you know so they're not just
doing it note for note although that can
be great but it's even better when they
could do it note fornote but then start
to play and they just get into a rhythm
that's something else and if it's really
working well then everyone in the whole
place is in the same Rhythm and it's all
pulsing with the same beat let's say and
everyone's just thrilled out of their
mind which is why there's like 50,000
people doing it and it's useful to know
what what are you doing there and the
answer seems to be you're playing along
with your favorite band that's a pretty
good deal he cuz you got these highly
skilled creative people up front
doing their best allowing you to mimic
that in some real sense as part of the
experience you know people will sing
along and they'll dance that's all
mimicry you can't help but dance that's
all part of the spirit of play and
so you treat yourself like you're
someone responsible for helping it's a
serious injunction even though its aim
is play and this is part of asking too
before you receive it's like okay give
yourself the benefit of the doubt even
though it's hard give it your appalling
pathetic ignorant lazy nature you know
and all the things you could be that you
aren't you aren't it's hard to give
yourself the benefit of the doubt but
you could say well would it really be so
terrible if my life wasn't miserable
would it be so terrible if I got what I
wanted and needed especially if I was
doing that in the best possible way and
that has to be a serious question right
you can't just tell yourself this you
have to open yourself up to the
possibility that that might be true then
you can say to yourself well if I could
have what I needed and wanted in a
manner that would be best for me and you
can imagine that takes a fair bit of
orientation to get that question right
then what would my life look like and
that's a frightening question people
generally are loathed to ask ask
themselves that question because there's
a couple of reasons one is maybe you
feel you don't deserve it well another
is you don't know that that's what you
should do because we're so badly taught
that this idea is generally not
presented to people which is just
absolutely appalling beyond belief as
far as I can tell but then there's more
impediments too a because one of the
things people do to butress themselves
against failure is to never let
themselves really gain clarity about
what they need and
want let's say you try something but you
only do it
half-heartedly and then you fail and you
think well I didn't really fail because
you know I held a bunch back in reserve
and so I didn't get what I wanted but
maybe had I been all in I would have and
so you don't have to up braid yourself
too much for the failure now it's a
catastrophic way to live to sit on the
fence and to not commit because instead
of risking the possibility of failure
you engage in what's essentially the
absolute certainty of failure because if
you want something worthwhile and
difficult which you probably do if you
want to have an adventure and go
somewhere then what's the chance you're
going to get it if you're halfway in
it's like if you can then you didn't aim
high enough obviously and that's not
going to be exciting or engaging and so
if you're actually pursuing something
that would motivate you maximally you
can't be halfway in but that sort of
protects you against failure because you
can tell yourself well if I tried I
could have done it it's like you know
you tell yourself that 200 times and
you're life's over and so I would
seriously not recommend that and then
another problem is that if you let
yourself know what you need and
want then you can betray yourself right
so do you trust yourself and the answer
is well not really and the reason is
well I trusted myself before and I
misbehaved terribly so why would I do
that again and fair enough you know
that's a a solid question but on the
other hand
if you don't let yourself know what you
need and want what's the probability
that you're going to do a random walk in
the right direction especially given
that there's lots of ways to randomly
walk and there are very few Pathways to
what you really need and want and so
it's an Act of
Faith and and I don't mean the belief in
Preposterous things I mean an act of
existential courage to ask yourself what
you need and want imagine you wanted to
live without bitterness you want to live
without cynicism and maybe even more you
wanted to live in something
approximating a spirit of
play what would you need and want to
make that happen well it's very
terrifying to to allow yourself to
Envision that first of all because
you've made your conditions for failure
very clear second because you've set
yourself up to betray yourself in a
fundamental way and
third often the apprehension of the
distance between you and that goal can
also be demoralizing and overwhelming
now I think the way you deal with that
is you can make a lot of progress
incrementally you know once you specify
a goal you don't have to LEAP from where
you are to the goal in one F swoop uh if
you could you probably didn't set a diff
enough difficult enough goal it's okay
to move make incremental movement
forward that's why there's another rule
here which is uh compare yourself to who
you were yesterday not to who someone
else is today you know if you get the
comparison right you can say well here's
where I'm headed and it's worth going to
you have to ask yourself that is there a
place I could head to that would be
worth getting to and that's a question
right it's a question like you might ask
your wife it's like okay if I could give
you what you wanted it's a good thing to
ask during an argument by the way really
really it has to be an honest questions
like you're arguing with me I don't know
who's right neither of us cuz we're both
clueless and confused it's like like if
you could have what you wanted in this
moment and I could deliver it what would
it be that General answer to that is
something like if you loved me you'd
know which is not a
helpful how come you know that answer
it's not a helpful answer it's like no
I'm I'm too stupid to know what you want
that's for sure you don't even know what
you want so how in the world am I going
to figure it out but it's a lovely gift
to offer your partner by the way the
conditions for your
satisfaction but then you have to allow
yourself to know what they are and you
have to be acting in your own best
interest and then that exposes you to
all these potential calamities that we
just described and uh that's a big risk
but it's not nearly as big a risk as
never getting what you want and need and
that is definitely the alternative and
that's a pathway to bitterness and
cynicism and a wasted life and and
bitterness and cynicism that's just
where that starts it gets way worse as
it compounds
and
so it's very useful to treat
yourself like you're someone you're
responsible for helping and it is very
useful to compare yourself to who you
were yesterday not to who someone else
is today there's
no way of interacting with someone
including yourself that's more
productive than to give targeted reward
where credit is due to give credit where
credit is due do and you might say well
how can I treat myself well given that
I'm nothing but a the embodiment of
serpentine uh what would you call it
errors and sins and the answer is well
if you're a little better than you were
previously that's
something really and maybe that's what
you want to see in your kids right I
mean you don't want to push them too far
you you don't want to punish them if
they haven't made huge leaps forward
developmentally what you want to
is incremental progress that requires
some effort and that's actually what
your kids really love too you know if
they're playing hard they're they're on
the edge they're pushing themselves to
develop their skills maybe they're
playing a sport they're pushing
themselves to move incrementally at the
optimum rate that's another thing that
play indicates by the way that's and
that's so cool to know too play signals
that you're pushing yourself forward at
the optimal rate cuz you can't stay
static and you can't absorb too much
change at once how do you know when it's
right
well it's engaging it's meaningful but
at the highest level it's something like
play you know when kids when you're when
you're playing a sport you want to play
against someone who's approximately the
same level of skill as you or maybe a
little Beyond right if you're playing a
game with someone who's approximately
your equal then you're pushing each
other exactly enough to facilitate
optimal movement forward and that's
actually a very
good conceptual scheme for apprehending
the nature of a marriage so I found out
from Ben Shapiro interestingly enough
that there's a there's a there's a
translation in the King James Bible um
of of God's description of Eve before he
makes her says uh the King James version
says that God says he's going to make
Adam a help meet and that's a archaic
word right no no you don't call your
wife your help meet generally or you're
going to get a slap probably if you do
but my point is it's an archaic term
the the the biblical language means
something like beneficial
adversary and that's very nice you know
it's it's very nice because a beneficial
adversary would be
someone that you're pushing against and
that's pushing against you exactly the
right amount and there's this phenomena
phenomena that's known neurologically
called opponent processing and a lot of
the manners in which we make difficult
ult and calibrated decisions
neurologically involves two systems
working in counterposition to one
another so imagine I want to move my
hand smoothly as smoothly as possible
that's pretty smooth but I'm shaking a
little bit and it's a bit jerky so I'm
using
voluntary systems to move my hand and
they're a little imprecise if I want to
move it perfectly I go like
this and then I can calibrate it
unbelievably precisely and that that
that dance that you have with your
partner that's what that's supposed to
be optimized opponent processing so
imagine why it's it's like it's the same
as free speech in some real sense it's a
manifestation of the logos that
optimized adversarial process why well
think about it this way imagine you have
a child and uh or you have three
children they're all quite different cuz
children tend to be quite different even
if they're born in the same family and
so then you might ask yourself well how
should we treat our children and the
answer is
well they're different so is there a
rule and there are some guidelines and
principles I had one in my book don't
don't let your children do anything that
makes you dislike them that's a good
rule to turn
to how do you know if you're not being a
tyrant you know your children act up and
they annoy you maybe you're just mean
or maybe they never annoy you but they
annoy everyone else in which case you're
not mean
enough and I mean that definitely
because if your children never annoy you
but they annoy everyone
else then they won't have any
friends and then they're in real
trouble but your children are different
so how do you know how to calibrate your
response to them and the answer is well
you push back and forth against your
wife or your husband
and you you know maybe want to use a bit
more encouraging and want to to use a
bit more Sheltering that's often the
masculine versus feminine roles Al
although that can intermingle you know
but generally those are associated with
Justice in some sense and encouragement
with masculinity and mercy and
tenderness with femininity probably
because women have to care for infants
and so they tilt more towards that end
in any
case you have to calibrate that for each
kid and the only way to do that is to
push against each other right because
how else you going to do it there's no
rule and it's a dynamically changing
situation and you're too clueless and
blind on your own to do it properly but
maybe the two of you ironing out each
other's kinks in some sense in this
constant dance oriented as you might be
to the optimal development of your
children who you hypothetically love
maybe you can calibrate a moving Target
by pushing on each other back and forth
and maybe if you do that
optimally then you then it manifests
itself as something like play and you
know that happens cuz you take your kids
out hopefully this happens at least
sometimes you take your kids out to the
beach or something like that you have a
great day and what does that mean well
it means you got the balance right right
because there's some freedom and there's
some principles there's some rules it's
a game and
everything comes together in the right
place at the right time and you think
that was a good day and you think yeah
every day could could every day be like
that and maybe that's too much to ask
for every day but it's something to aim
for and something to try to Foster and
it's something to know consciously you
know that that that playful
engagement that's a marker of the
highest form of
being it might be easy to just toss all
of your discipline to the side for the
summer but a life of greatness doesn't
happen by taking the easy route the
Hallow app offers an incredible range of
guided meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
embark on a journey of exploration
diving into different themes and types
of prayer and meditation from gratitude
to forgiveness each session offers a
unique experience sparking your
curiosity and deepening your spiritual
understanding you can choose different
lengths of meditation to fit your
schedule whether you have a few minutes
or an hour with its user friendly
interface in hundreds of guided
meditations the hall app has quickly
become a go-to resource for people
seeking spiritual growth and healing you
can download the app for free at
hall.com Jordan it allows you to set
prayer reminders and track your progress
hallo is truly transformative and it'll
help you connect with your faith on a
deeper level don't lose your prayer
habits this summer maintain your peace
and deepen your relationship with God
download the hall app today at hall.com
Jordan for an exclusive 3month trial
that's hall.com
Jordan Al so that's three
rules
so we can talk a little bit more about
do not let your children do anything
that makes you dislike
them that's a tricky one and people are
afraid of their children especially
modern people because they're afraid
that they're going to interfere with
their the flowering of their creative
potential or something like that and
fair enough you know because there is
something remarkable about the potential
that you see in children but they're
also you know wild and and unconstrained
in their activity and
so that possibility has to be harnessed
in some sense and I think the right way
again to conceptualize that is not so
much that the child is moving outward
and trying to be creative and and free
and all Society does is constrain that
in some sort of patriarchal or radical
manner I think that's a suboptimal
solution I think what you do instead is
you you channel that creative
possibility into something like
well-regulated
games and a game has to operate by
principles and has to have a certain
degree of predictability right so
there's some order there but if you have
your disciplinary routines optimized
then much of what governs the household
is something like play
and and and I can make a technical case
for that
so children of two years old they really
can't play with other children and by
the time a child is two he can or she
can do something like play with a truck
right it's very abstract thing to do cuz
a little toy truck that's not a truck
right that's a representation of a truck
and when the child is playing at driving
the truck they're not driving a truck
they're formulating a very complex
representation of the world and acting
out a potential role it's very
sophisticated when when a girl plays
with a doll too she's not playing with a
baby obviously she's practicing doing
that and that's very sophisticated but
two-year-olds they really can't play
together and the great developmental
psychologist Jean P made much of this he
was a real genius because P was the
first person who really
understood that the proper basis of
social order is play and that the reason
children play is because they're
practicing taking their optimal place in
the social order it's crucially
important and then any social order that
isn't predicated on the spirit of play
is suboptimal and and that's also very
much worth knowing you know if you're a
business person a good one you pretty
much only want to enter into business
arrangements with people who can play
fundamentally because otherwise you have
to connive or use force or you know get
paranoid about whether or not they're
holding up their end of the bargain and
it's so dull it's counter are productive
what you really want is you want to have
something to offer something valuable
and you want to go to someone you say
look this is what I've got they say well
this is what I've got and then you say
well look if we put the two things we've
got together here's a bunch of things we
could do that would really be good and
that would be good for both of us and in
a way that we couldn't do aart that's a
pretty good deal so it's probably worth
a bit of time and effort so back to the
two-year-olds they can't play together
so maybe you put two two-year-olds in a
room and maybe they both want to play
with the truck they'll fight and maybe
one wants to play with the truck and one
wants to play with a doll let's say and
then they'll play side by side and if
you're a casual Observer you think the
kids are playing together but they're
not they're just in the same room
they're not playing together until
they're playing the same
game and that really doesn't start to
happen till they're about three and when
they're about three and this is where
pretend play really starts to Dawn
Mutual pretend play they'll do things
they engage in dramatic play they'll do
things like a boy and a girl they'll say
to each other
uh do you want to play house which a
pretty bloody fundamental question when
it gets right down to it you're going to
be asking women that for the rest of
your life badly or well and you might
not know that that's what you're
doing and in which case you're probably
doing it
badly but that is what you're doing and
so kids are practicing that and the rule
is the girl has to want to play That's A
good rule you could stamp that on your
forehead the girl needs to want to play
and in any case at about three kids
start to be capable of negotiating a
shared play space and by the way just to
be clear about that that's no different
than negotiating an
identity this idea that identity is
something you define subjectively and
then can impose on other people that's
what 2-year-olds think and that's what
the kind of 2-year-old who stays UNP
popular for the rest of his or her life
thinks and now we're making that
law that's not very
wise and then the other way that you can
tell that's two-year-old behavior is
that if I don't accept the identity that
you're imposing me on subjectively
you'll have a tantrum it's like yeah I
knew you were too and now you just
proved it and it I'm actually kind of
sad about this
because one of the things I have noticed
as a clinician is that a lot of this
emergent identity confusion that
particularly characterizes adolescence
and at the moment particularly
adolescent young women is likely a
consequence of
styed childhood
play you know it's awful and it's
causing a lot of trouble but it's also
there's something about it that's really
sad in any case at three a child who's
developing along
an optimal trajectory is now capable of
asking of inviting someone else to play
someone at about their developmental
level and if they're optimally skilled
which means in part that they have
parents who haven't paved the pathway
for them to
misbehave right have taught them to some
degree about how to take turns and how
to be careful with each other then at
three they're ready to play with other
children and then what happens if
they're optimized play Partners is that
they make friends and then the friends
socialize them so parents are not the
primary source of
socialization after the age of about
four peers are that's partly why adant
are so absolutely obsessed with what
their peers think of them which is
appropriate even though it can go too
far is because your peers are going to
make up your Society right as you all
mature together and you have to adapt to
the circumstances of your
and the parents should pave the road for
that adaptation but you make friends and
then your peers play with you and they
socialize you optimally and if that
doesn't happen by the time you're
four then it never happens there's a
huge psychological literature on this if
you're alienated from your peers at age
four as far as we know there's nothing
that can be done to fix that you're
permanently
alienated and so you're already in jail
in some real sense and then that just
gets worse as you mature that's one
Pathway to life-term Crim life longterm
criminality aggressive 2-year-old male
usually doesn't get socialized between
the age of two and four because
aggressive males are harder to socialize
doesn't make friends done and the reason
seems to be that imagine that at 4 you
need to start making friends and because
you make friends you start to develop
more and more social sophistication but
but then imagine you don't make friends
you're already so far behind that you
don't make friends and now all your
peers are skyrocketing forward and so
you just fall farther and farther behind
and you get more alienated and still
using 2-year-old aggression to solve
your problems and more bitter and more
cynical and more jaded more isolated and
of course that's not going to do wonders
for your popularity and so it's a very
bad positive feedback loop and it starts
very early in any case why should you
not let your children do anything that
makes you dislike them well first of all
let's say you is the wife and the
husband together right CU if your kid
annoys you well you maybe you're having
a bad day or maybe you know your father
was too tyrannical to you and you have
some of those proclivities or or maybe
on the more maternal side you're willing
to let your kids run rough shot all over
you and not to stop them but the two of
you together you might ask each other
hey honey that kid's annoying me is that
kid annoying you it's like yeah as a
matter of fact that kid's annoying me
too it's like well either we're both
crazy in the same
way now you're both
crazy but are you crazy in the same way
the answer that's probably not so if
you're both thinking something together
there's a reasonable probability that
the two of you are right and so then you
can think well if this kid's driving us
crazy given that together we're not out
of our minds
hopefully if he's driving us crazy then
he's probably not going to be very
popular with anyone
else and then that's a good time to
think well do do we want an unpopular
and miserable child and the answer might
be yes you know cuz sometimes they won't
leave home and if you have no other
purpose in life than to devote yourself
entirely to a dependent child then
crippling them socially is a really
lovely way to attain that and if you
don't think that
happens then you're the sort of naive
person who will eventually run into
someone malevolent and learn just how
naive you are and so in any case you
know you have a
responsibility with regards to your
children to not let them do things that
make you dislike them and if they're
doing things that make you dislike them
despite the fact that you love them you
can imagine the effect that's having on
other people and you got to ask yourself
too like how do you want your children
to be treated when they go in
public you know most people will give
children the benefit of the doubt one of
the things that was so lovely I lived in
this I lived in Montreal when I first
had young kids and I lived in a rough
neighborhood it was very it was a
workingclass neighborhood it was quite
poor most of the people were uneducated
in sort of multigenerational way it was
a rough neighborhood um and we had
Michaela my daughter and we used to zoom
around in her in her stroller and it was
so fun because you'd see these rough
guys walk down the street you know tough
looking guys you'd give them a bit of a
birth on the street generally speaking
and they just break into a smile and you
know coochie coo her and it brings out
the best in people it's so lovely to see
that it's one of the things that you
don't know before you become a parent is
that you become a parent you enter this
little Club of other parents that you
didn't even know existed but you also
get to see the best of people in a way
you never did before and that's lovely
and
so people are willing to give your
children the benefit of the doubt
you want to facilitate that by having
your child act in a manner
that heightens the probability that
that's how people are going to act
towards them and then instead you know a
misbehaving
child I've had plenty of experience with
this sort of thing in all sorts of ways
a misbehaving child lives in a world of
adult
falsity because nobody really wants the
child around and so everywhere they go
there are forced and strained smiles and
bare tolerance
that's a little bit of hell that is and
the alternative is well your child is
properly
socialized and everyone's happy to have
them around and then wherever they go
everyone's happy to have them around and
then they make friends and adults are
much more likely to interact with them
in a positive way and that's what you're
you want to give that to your kids well
unless you want the other outcome that I
described you know or maybe you're
jealous of your children cuz you're old
and you're bitter you know and you see
your child flourishing in some way that
you didn't get to and you want to knock
that the hell out of them and that's
another Pathway to take too
but you know that's a good little trip
to hell if you want to Embark down that
road here's another
rule pursue what is Meaningful not what
is
expedient this is also a great thing to
know I think that's a tricky rule
expedient might
be we're going to have a
conversation and I want something from
you and a lot of conversations are like
that you know because you have a goal in
mind this is what I want from this
person and so then you craft your
conversation to get what you want right
you subordinate your words to your to
the ethic of your
desire and you might saywell what's
wrong with that well what do you know
about what you want
like haven't you been wrong about that
before and you might say well what's the
alternative well is there an alternative
well you have to get want something from
the person to even interact with them
it's like no you you could want to see
what
happens you could want to
play you could tell the
truth that's an interesting thing to do
because you don't know what's going to
happen if you tell the truth that's for
sure you could let go of what you want
and just say what you think
and you could presume and this is an Act
of Faith too that the truth does set you
free and that the truth that's spoken
properly makes out of possibility the
order that is habitable and good and
then you could just tell the truth and
you could see what happens and that
would be an adventure and that's better
than expediency partly
because maybe you're wrong about what
you
want you know and you know that because
you're kind of narrow and be narrowly
self-serving from time to time and your
purview of the world isn't as wide as it
could be and you're bit bitter so you
tend to be that narrowly selfish because
of that so you want something from a
conversation and you bend and twist it
to get it it's like fine
but maybe you'll get something you don't
want or Worse you'll get something
that's positively bad for you that
happens a lot and so part of the reason
there's a deep moral injunction to tell
the
truth in a religious sense is
because there's a hypothesis behind that
which is there isn't anything better
that can happen to you than what will
happen to you if you tell the truth now
that might be hidden from you because
sometimes if you tell the truth and I
don't mean to blurt everything out
carelessly like this is a sophisticated
thing to do it's not careless doesn't
mean just say any old thing that pops
into your head
are you struggling with back taxes or
unfiled returns this year the IRS is
actively escalating collections by
adding 20,000 new agents in these
challenging times your best defense is
to use tax Network USA along with hiring
thousands of new agents in field
officers the IRS has kicked off 2024 by
sending over 5 million pay up letters to
those who have unfiled tax returns or
balances owed these guys are not your
friends don't wave your rights and speak
with these agents independently without
backup tax Network USA a trusted tax
relief firm has saved over $1 billion in
back taxes for their clients and they
can help you secure the best deal
possible whether you owe $10,000 or 10
million they can help whether it's
business or personal taxes whether you
have the means to pay or on a fixed
income tax Network can help resolve your
tax burdens once and for all seize
control of your financial future now and
don't let tax issues overpower you
contact tax Network USA for immediate
relief and expert guidance call 1 1800
245 6000 or visit TN
usa.com Peterson turn to tax Network USA
and find your path to financial peace of
mind that's TN
usa.com
Peterson you have to be judicious with
the truth but the notion would be if
something emerges as a consequence of
engaging truthfully and it doesn't seem
to be going your way wait there's more
to the story to unfold cuz like how do
you know if it goes your way or not like
over what time span are you calculating
this because sometimes things can go
pretty badly initially and then much
better as they progress and lots of
times the truth has that effect because
you know you you reveal something that's
maybe disturbing or or shocking even to
yourself and others and it causes waves
especially if it's a deep truth and
destabilizes everything it's like
yeah but maybe that's preferable to a
false
piece you can't find out if it's true
without doing it you're not going to
gather the evidence
beforehand so that's the true side of it
meaning pursue what's meaningful instead
of what's expedient it's another hint
like the spirit of play about the
pathway the yin and yangang symbol you
know the famous symbol it's two serpents
one black one white head to tail
inside the black serpent there's a white
dot and inside the White serpent there's
a black dot and the the representation
is something like the world of your
experience is made up of Chaos and Order
and order is where you are when things
are going according to what you want and
chaos is everything that can come in and
disrupt that and both of those can be
positive and negative too much order
tyranny right too much chaos nihilistic
uncertainty optimized
balance so let's think about what the
optimized balance would
mean you have
a a structure of perception and
conception that you inhabit it's
orderly reasonably orderly orderly
enough so that when you inhabit it most
of the time things are going the way you
want them to
go but things change and shift and you
don't know everything you should know so
you can't just stay where you are with
the good thing you have to
expand and as you expand you move out of
the domain of order into the domain of
chaos or out of the domain of actuality
into the domain of
possibility and then you might think
well how do you know when you're doing
that optimally well one marker as I said
before maybe that you do it in the
spirit of play but another is and this
is so much worth
knowing things get
meaningful you know people ask does life
have any meaning it's like why is
anything worth doing if in 4 billion
years the Sun is going to envelop the
earth and the the answer to that
question is that's a stupid
question and I can prove that in some
sense it's like you're a mother and your
baby's crying and so you're going over
there to do something about it and
someone comes along and says why why do
you care if that baby's crying you know
in four billion years the Sun is going
to envelop the Earth and what's the
right response to that it's like
it's something like go away are you out
of your
mind and the answer to that question is
yes you you are out of your mind of
course you can find a time frame or a a
spatial frame of reference that makes
everything you do
pointless you know it's like what is
this going to matter in 20 trillion
years well it's
like the only proper response to that is
that's not a wise time frame imagine
you're in a you're in a concert you know
listening to some great music and it's
got you you know and someone Taps you on
the shoulder and you know this is going
to come to an
end and what's your response like go
away and that's the right response to
that voice in your head that does those
things to you which says you know you're
engaged in something and a nihilistic
thought comes out well what's the point
of this given you know how unbearable
the world is and the current political
situation and the fact that we're
inhabiting some ball of dust on the edge
of some Fringe part of the cosmos and
that everything's dead in material it's
like get thee behind me Satan right
really it's not a it's not a mark of
[Applause]
wisdom it's not a mark of wisdom to let
nihilistic demonic voices steal your Jah
deiv that is not a mark of wisdom and
you might object well at least it's not
naive it's like yeah cynicism might be
preferable to naivity but it doesn't
hold a candle to wisdom and that's worth
knowing too CU once you've been hurt and
you're cynical there's no going back to
naive but there's no point in staying at
cynical and there are degrees of Courage
Way Beyond cynicism and some of that is
the regaining of the faith you had as a
child despite your current level of
wisdom and that's something to strive
for right that's a moral attainment
that's not of burying your head back in
the sand quite the contrary and so well
back to the yin and yang
symbol imagine you have an instinct that
orients
you well you do as a as a matter of fact
there's a reflex that's replicated at
multiple levels of your nervous system
and it's ancient if you have a nervous
system as an animal you have this reflex
and the reflex is something like
surprise
you know if I walk across the stage and
I hear a loud noise behind me I might go
like this and that would be automatic
because I'm gripped by unconscious
systems and what's happening is some
chaos has emerged and it stops me in my
tracks because because something
unexpected happened my current plan is
incomplete and then I'll turn and Orient
towards the the place of the disturbance
and that's the beginning of exploratory
Behavior then I might run away which
might make me safe or I might caution
iously
investigate in which case I can find out
what caused the disturbance maybe
Rectify it and maybe update my plan so
that that sort of thing doesn't happen
again that's a better
approach in fact that's the optimal
approach that's also the meaningful
approach and so here's something to know
if you're engaged in something and it's
infusing you with a sense of
meaning then your nervous system is
signaling to you that you've optimized
the balance between stability and
transformation and that manifests itself
in the sense that you're in the right
place at the right time doing the right
thing and it's not it's not conceptual
right it's not it's not abstract it's
not a theory it's an embodied
sense and you might say well I I don't
know what that sense is exactly but it's
the sense that you have when you're
engrossed in a piece of music and what's
music well it's
principled and somewhat predictable
patterning spiced with unpredictability
creative unpredictability and if it's
optimized it grips you and it's a
representation it's a representation in
some sense of optimal being and it's so
interesting that that's the case because
it does grip us no matter how nihilistic
you are something I always liked about
punk rock I was a teenager when the Sex
Pistols first emerged on the scene and
uh they're very interesting to me
because they're their music is so
nihilistic and it's so meaningful and
that's such a weird combination It's
like because the overt lyrics are I just
smash everything to hell and Anarchy
everywhere but you know there's a great
beat and everybody's dancing away it's
like and even the skin heads who were
anarchic they would Dance I mean they'd
smash into each other and there was
often blood but it was it was a kind of
dance it was better than nothing that's
for sure and that's why they went to the
concerts and so to be imbued by that
sense of meaning even in their istic
anarchism they were still engaged in
that the sense of meaning that music
produces and it does put you back to the
in and yang symbol it puts you right in
the middle of Chaos and Order that's the
right pathway that's the da by the way
for the dsts it's the pathway that runs
between Chaos and Order and it's
signaled to you by the sense of
engrossed meaning and then you could say
to yourself you got to stake your life
on something e One Way or Another cuz
you have to move forward in ignorance so
you're always making a decision about
what you're going to take on faith I
don't care what you're doing you have to
make that decision well what if you
stake your life on the intrinsic value
of sublime meaning how would that be
well you have to act it out to find out
but you do get hints you know if you're
gripped by Something Beautiful it does
that something artistic that's deep if
you're gripped by literature that
stretches you it does that a movie that
engrosses you does that almost
everything you do that's entertaining
does that when you're at a sports event
and you're watching someone stunningly
skilled do something incredibly
difficult that puts you in the same
place that stretches you out and
produces this intimation of meaning and
then you might say as well and this
would be lovely if it was true and I do
think it's actually true which is really
quite something is what's the best
antidote to pain and you might
say well pleasure
it's like
yeah that's not going to be forthcoming
that much when you're in pain and
so and then pleasure per se has its own
vices let's say that's for sure how
about meaning as the antidote to
pain how would that be then you might
think well where do people find meaning
well they certainly find it in aesthetic
Pursuits and artistic Pursuits in the
domains of literature and art Beauty all
that but people also find me meaning and
responsibility and that's something
we've forgotten to a degree that's
almost incomprehensible you know if
you're ever really ill which you will be
if you're ever really in pain which you
certainly will be if you're ever faced
with hellish circumstances which you
certainly will be you might ask yourself
well what do you have under those
circumstances and maybe if you're
fortunate you have someone to play with
and maybe if you're fortunate you have
the meaning of your
responsibilities you know and even if
you're the sinner who's produced the
hell that's around you and you can say
to yourself yeah but you know I've been
a good servant to my wife and I've been
a good father to my children and my
family's been a credit to the community
and I've taken on some Community
responsibilities to try to set the
broader world around me right and I've
shouldered my Civic duties and as far as
I've been able to I've been a good
person then maybe while you're suffering
don't have to Scourge yourself with all
your sins at the same time and that's
something man and maybe in that
situation that's all you're going to
have and that might be the difference
not only between life and death but
between hell and life because there are
worse things than death that's for sure
and so
and so then imagine if it was the case
that you could have what you needed and
wanted and you could say
well play is the antidote to
tyranny that'd be lovely and meaning is
the antidote to pain and cynicism and
bitterness and social discontent and
Discord and so then your life could be
meaningful
play maybe you can come up with a
better optimistic proposition than that
and if you can good good for you really
but that's not a bad Vision you know and
you can test it out one of the things I
used to do with my clients this is real
useful too and it it's sort of done in
the spirit of necessary humility so
imagine your life isn't everything it
could be it's generally not that hard to
imagine but then also imagine that
there's some variation you know week to
week is that maybe you're pretty damn
miserable but sometime you're
unbelievably miserable and sometime
you're just sort of miserable and that's
not great but at least there's some
variability one of the things you might
do as a
clinician or as a friend or as a
partner is say well exactly what are you
doing when you're less
miserable and what are you doing when
you're more miserable don't think about
it watch like you're watching someone
you don't know this often happens with
with depressed people so one of the
problems with depression is it's a
positive feedback loop hey because you
get depressed and then you stop seeing
your friends and even if you're
introverted there's friends you want to
see at least oneon-one at least now and
then so now you start to isolate
yourself and then you get more depressed
and then you isolate yourself more then
you get more depressed it's downhill
spiral you know it's not good a lot of
forms of mental illness are positive
feedback loops that spiral out of
control
so one of the things you might do with a
depressed person they come to see you if
you're a therapist you might say look
just for the next week or two weeks or
so I want you to just keep a mood record
you know maybe check in with yourself
every hour scale from 1 to 10 just write
down how depressed you are with 10 being
suicidal and one being as good as you
get let's say or maybe even life is
worth living and maybe the depressed
person never gets you know below six or
something but six is way better than 10
and then they come back and you look and
you think oh look every time you were at
6 instead of 10 you were you were with
this particular person or this set of
people or maybe you're working in your
garden who knows right or maybe if
you're artistic you were doing something
artistic despite the fact that you're
Paralyzed by your depression but notice
your mood improved some and then look 10
out of 10 depressed you're alone in your
room in bed that's like not it's like
11: in the morning it's like okay so how
about this next week don't be alone in
your bed at 11:00 in the morning and
spend like 20% more time or 10% or
2% with your friends or doing something
that seems to improve not your mood but
your state of being and then play with
that and see you know can you tilt
yourself gradually and incrementally
comparing yourself to who you were
yesterday you tilt yourself in the right
direction and then well that's for
depressed people you might say well
could you do that in your life and the
answer
is
yes so the
Egyptians worshiped this god Horus h o r
u s and Horus you know Horus weirdly
enough everyone knows that famous
Egyptian eye you know with the arched
eyebrow and you know on the back of an
American dollar bill you have an eye
that's separated from the pyramid that's
Horus as well interestingly enough
that's the gold cap on a pyramid it's
the aluminum cap on the Washington
Monument aluminum was more precious than
gold when they built the Washington
Monument the top of a pyramid is the
gold cap and the gold cap is the eye and
what's the eye the eye is the thing that
pays attention and so Horus was the eye
and he was the eye that could see evil
and rectify it by the way and he was
also a falcon and the reason he was a
falcon is because a falcon is a bird of
prey that flies above everything and
that can see and birds of prey they can
see better than us we're we're very
visual animals we have the second best
visual systems of any animal Birds of
Prey see better than we do they can see
clearer and farther an an o a falcon if
a falcon was on top of the Empire State
Building he could see a dime on the
pavement below they're unbelievably
sharp eyed and ancient people knew this
they hunted with birds of prey and they
watched them they knew they had
spectacular vision and so they used the
Falcon as an image of redeeming
vision and they Associated redeeming
Vision with the sun setting and and
Rising because the sun shines when you
can see and so that's a solar God and
that's the hero that fights the dragon
at night and that comes up victorious in
the morning a very old idea that's all
associated with vision and vision pays
attention assume that the person you are
listening to might know something you
don't that doesn't mean everything you
don't and that might mean hardly
anything at all but maybe you could
glean something and because you're
clueless and Confused anything you glean
might be useful and so it's useful to
attend like in a in a in a in a manner
that's infused with humility why
humility because you need to know that
what you don't know is more important
than what you do know that's a hard
thing to learn cuz you want to fortify
what you know man cuz it feels
protective and it's very threatening to
move on the periphery of what you know
but there's a lot of what you don't know
a lot and you need to know it and what
do you what attitude do you need to
bring to bear on what you don't know
it's like pay attention there might be
something there for you and so then you
attend to yourself and that ties us back
up to the first rule which
is treat yourself like you're someone
who you might be responsible for helping
well what does that mean like you don't
know who you are because you
don't as if you're someone made in the
image of god let's say someone despite
your flaws of divine intrinsic value who
could hypothetically be a light on the
hill hard as that is to
believe and then watch and see when
you're you should
be and maybe you're only a bit of the
way there you know and it's you're kind
of your life is hell to Purgatory that's
it there's very little glimpse of
paradise but Purgatory beats the hell
out of hell and so maybe you can move
from Hell into purgatory that would be
something and maybe when you're there
now and then you're getting a little bit
beyond that you think you know right at
this moment for whatever
reason I'm not doing something so
terrible that I'm in
hell what is going
on what's the circumstance what did I
allow to
happen that made this possible it's a
it's a form of Awakening in the in the
most profound sense to notice when that
happens then you think could I be there
more often 1% more
often that compounds very quickly you
know if it's 1% a week for a year you're
going to be there like twice as long in
a year as you were before you started
and God only knows how good you could
get at that if you didn't do anything
other than that let's say if you really
committed to that God only knows what
your life could be like in 5 years or 10
years maybe you could be in that state
all the time and who knows what effect
you'd have on you and your family and
the people around you if you were in
that state and that's something worth
thinking about too and maybe that's a
good thing to close you know
we have this notion developed not least
in in your great
country that people have an intrinsic
worth that we're Sovereign citizens that
we're all possessed of a voice that
redeems the state that's why we have an
inalienable right to to free speech
let's say because we're necessary
corrective to the blindness and archaic
nature of the state we the living eyes
of the Dead King
and maybe that's really true then you
think well if the world isn't everything
you want it to be I set your house in
perfect order before you criticize the
world if the world isn't everything that
you want it to
be maybe you're not acting the way you
should you know because there's some
intimation in our deepest ideas that the
word the weight of the world rests on
your shoulders now that's a terrible
thing to think but maybe it's true and
it's an open question how much of the
mess that you see around you would
vanish if the mess that you
could put straight was put
straight and you know you know you know
this too to some degree because to the
degree that you've not become entirely
embittered and cynical and hopeless you
know perfectly well that if you put your
mind to it and you make the proper
sacrifices there are things you can set
straight and that if you do that
diligently things actually
improve and so CU otherwise if you
didn't believe that you wouldn't act at
all like well maybe you just turned to
completely catastrophic short-term
impulsive pleasure something like that
you have to believe that your action has
some Redemptive possibility because why
would you do it otherwise and you might
say well I kind of believe that it's
like well that's not good enough you
know you you kind of got to throw
yourself all into it and what's the cost
anyways
you know it's not like you're going to
get out of this alive so you're pretty
much all in whether you want to be or
not and maybe if you were voluntarily
all in things would be a lot better than
they are and that's an exciting thing to
try to find out know if you allowed
yourself to be guided by the intimation
of meaning and I mean defined on your
terms in some real sense if you swore
that you do your best not to use deceit
and instrumental manipulation if you
decided that you were going to put
things
straight what do you think might happen
and I'll close with one
observation I read something very
terrifying by one of
my one of the thinkers who've influenced
me the most Carl Yung the great Swiss
analytic
psychologist he said something very
interesting at the end of World War II
apprehending the terrible Spectre of the
adom bomb and The Unbelievable
destructiveness of the second world
war he
said two things one
was we'll be more most threatened in the
future not by natural disasters or even
sociological disasters in some sense but
by pathologies of the psyche by
pathologies of the spirit because we
become so powerful that our proclivity
towards unnecessary insanity in some
sense poses the greatest threat to
us and I think that's true and he also
said something that's even more
terrifying he said any unconscious
conflict that you don't make conscious
and resolve will be played out in the
world as
fate so let me unpack that for a minute
imagine you're a man or a woman and
you've got something against some the
opposite sex you know you're you got
unanimous against women are got a bad
attitude towards men you think the men
deserve it and when you interact with
them they act in a way that makes it
look like they deserve it same on
them with regard to women then maybe you
have this experience where you have the
same bad experience with like five women
or five
men it's those men it's those women it's
like well what's the probability of that
let's say there's five and you that's
six it's a one in six probability that
it's them and a five and six probability
that it's you and what is it in you and
I mean unless all women are all women in
some sense are warped the same way or
all men if you keep bumping into them
the same way it's possible that you're
just bumping into your own blindness and
you better hope that's true because if
it's women and they're giving you a
rough time what are you going to do
there's a lot of women if it's you
hooray you might be able to you might be
able to rectify that and so you might
say well you have an unconscious
conflict a complex in relationship to
people of the opposite sex that's true
for almost everyone and if you don't
make that conscious you act it out you
know maybe get more irritated at certain
things than a reasonable person would
and that starts a whole Chain Reaction
who knows how it's going to manifest
itself if you made it conscious and
resolved it it'd go
away okay so now we're in a situation
where things are starting to Teeter
around us socially as everyone can feel
well how
catastrophic is that going to be how
catastrophic are willing we willing to
let it be how
catastrophic do we want it to be to
teach us what we won't learn
voluntarily I would say well we're going
to find out and here's a question you
could ask
yourself if you let enough of an
internal catastrophe strip you of all
you're in
inadequacies maybe you don't need an
external catastrophe to teach you the
lesson thank you very much
[Music]
[Applause]